Here’s a network consisting of 3 routers, router 1, router 2 and router 3
each router has a loopback configured as follows
this network is configured as 10.1.1.0/24
and this network is configured as 10.1.2.0/24
no routing protocols have been enabled on this routers
and we can see that by typing show ip protocols
so notice no protocols have been enabled on any of the routers.
show ip route on router 1 as an example
shows me only directly connected networks.
So to enable RIP simply go into global configuration mode
and type router and in this case rip and press enter.
Now you need to advertise networks and RIP
so you need to use the network command
and this is a classful network entry
so network 10 is a class A network.
So even if I enter it as follows
notice what happens when I look at the configuration
so I’m going to look at the RIP configuration in the running config
notice its changed to 10.0.0.0
so even though I type this in the running configuration the output looks as follows.
Now when I use the command show ip protocols
I can see that RIP has been enabled
the default version of RIP used for sending is version 1
the default received is version 1 and version 2
so notice received version 1, version 2, send is version 1
RIP at the moment is only enabled on F0/0
RIP will also automatically summarize networks
and that will cause a problem which I'll explain in a moment
by default, it will load share or load balance across 4 paths
it's advertising this network 10.0.0.0
no gateway of last resort has been configured
and the administrative distance for RIP is 120 by default.
If I want to advertise network 1.1.1.1
I need to add that as a network command 100 RIP process
So do show run | section rip
shows me my commands, I’ve used 2 network commands under the RIP process.
Now I should specify version 2
because I want to use RIP version 2
RIP version 2 supports Variable Length Subnet Mask or VLSM
notice we have /32 masks here as well as /24 mask
we need to use a version 2 of RIP
if we have varying or different subnet mask length.
So show ip protocols again
shows me that I’m using RIP we're sending version 2
and receiving version 2, so I have change it
from what it was set to previously, the network command does 2 things
it advertises networks that fall in the range of network command
so we will be advertising network 1 and network 10
while it will also advertise any networks
that fall in the range of the network command.
So to explain that in more detail, let’s have looked at router 2.
On router 2, when I use the command network 10.0.0.0
RIP will be enabled on both this interface and this interface
so now when I use the command do show ip protocols
notice RIP is enabled on both of these interfaces
any interface that falls within the range of the network command
so these 2 are subnets of network 10 will be advertised by the router
and RIP will advertise routes out of those interfaces.
So I need to advertise the loopback interface
and I need to set the version of RIP to version 2
so now when I type show ip route on router 1
notice I’m receiving a route 2.0.0.0/8 from router 2
notice it's automatically being summarized
this is a class A network
so router 2 is advertising it to router 1 as 2.0.0.0
because we move from 1 class A network to another class A network
automatic summarization takes place by default across classful boundaries.
So class A to class A 10 network 2 is automatically summarized
but that’s not a problem in this example
router 1 is able to ping the loopback of router 2
let's enable RIP on router 3
so router rip network 10.0.0.0 network 3.0.0.0 version 2
go to router 1 show ip route
router 1 is learning about netwok 10.1.2.0
this network here it wasn’t automatically summarized
because we are still within the 10 network.
Network 2 is being summarized do the command again.
and network 3 is being summarized
Router 1 can ping the loopback of router 3.
On router 3, it can ping the loopback of router 1
because the route is advertised via the RIP routing protocol
it's as simple as that to get a network of 3 routers
configured with RIP and advertising routes
so once again show run section rip
shows me the commands that I typed on router 3
to enable rip version 2, very simple